we interrupt this program for breaking
news from the global national news world
hello I'm Robin Gill we're standing by
with the Prime Minister set to address
Canadians this morning for the fourth
day in a row we're expecting an update
on federal measures to tackle the köppen
19 crisis the Prime Minister is in
self-isolation at his home his wife
Sophie Gregoire Trudeau is also there in
quarantine she revealed last week that
she tested positive for the virus she is
said to be doing well as of this morning
a number of Canadian provinces and
territories have declared states of
emergency and public health emergencies
to deal with the spreading virus nine
deaths have been recorded seven NBC one
in Ontario and one in Quebec in terms of
infections here's a look at the
situation across the country more than
750 people have now tested positive in
canada ottawa reported five new cases
today there are now 251 cases in Ontario
BC saw a major spike yesterday 45 new
cases bringing the total to 231 the
Prime Minister is ready to speak now
let's listen in over the last week
we've seen significant changes in what
kovat 19 means for the country every day
we've had new updates for Canadians on
Amazon plus the new valet restriction
wire we have implemented new travel
restrictions to halt the propagation of
the virus for example we are temporarily
restricting non-essential crossings of
the canada-us border we have invested in
health and research and unveiled an
unprecedented economic plan and the
economy I know it's also a lot to take
in
people are having to figure out how they
can work from home or close up shop
temporarily parents are trying to
explain to their kids what's going on
and why school is cancelled right now
the last thing anyone needs is to be
worrying about how to make ends meet
people need to know they have support
for their jobs their businesses their
industries and that's what our
government has been focused on
since day one yesterday we announced an
eighty two billion dollar plan that will
support all Canadians this includes a
whole range of measures and people
should be checking canada CA for the
latest information
our team is hard at work with the public
service and making sure these new
supports get to Canadians as quickly as
possible they're doing a fantastic job
already and I'll have a long discussion
with the clerk of the Privy Council
later today to talk about how we can
support our public servants and ensure
that Canadians can access these new
programs but the bottom line is this
we're giving you more help when you need
it if you're a parent we're here for you
just like for the single mom of two who
will get nearly fifteen hundred dollars
by the end of May because of the
increase in the Canada child benefit and
the GST credit if you're worried about
making ends meet we've got your back
just like for the family that was
concerned about their mortgage and now
doesn't have to make payments for the
next six months and if you're helping
others we're standing with you like with
the Samaritan House in Brandon Manitoba
that on Wednesday was able to open and
deal with kovat 19 thanks to new funding
they were worried because their clients
had nowhere to go since everything else
closed but now with the new support they
can stagger entry to 10 people at a time
extend hours and stock up the food bank
OVD mom on TV see me / Karthik sisa also
we will get through this together
whether you need more time to repay a
student loan or whether your farmer
worried about your income we are there
for you and we will continue doing
everything we can to help you to pull
out all the stops to keep you safe we're
moving forward on vital research for
everything from better understanding how
this virus spreads to developing
vaccines and treatments as part of the 1
billion dollar fund I announced earlier
this month 25 million dollars will
directly support 49 researchers and 30
across the country their work is focused
on developing and implementing measures
to detect manage and reduce the spread
of kovat 19 across the country
scientists and researchers are working
extremely hard I want to take a moment
to specifically thank them for all the
essential work they're doing at the same
time we will expedite access to kovat 19
lab test kits and other medical devices
the reality is that the need for these
test kits is growing yesterday dr. Tam
said that officials have now tested more
than 50 thousand Canadians since the
beginning of the outbreak 25,000 of
those were done just in the last week
alone so while we ramped up we're making
sure Canada is ready to keep up
ministers haidu and Minister Freeland
will continue working with the provinces
and territories so that everyone has the
resources they need in times of crisis
Canadians come together we've heard from
businesses from coast to coast to coast
who are telling us they want to help
soon I'll have more to say about
procurement and how industry can help
with this effort but until then I want
to let people know that we are working
tirelessly to keep our hospitals health
care system and Canadians supported on
that note let me take a moment to
recognize again the incredible work of
our nurses doctors technicians and other
health care professionals they are on
the front lines of this and they're
doing a remarkable job we need to
support them and keep them healthy as
well but even if you don't work in a
hospital you can still keep people
healthy
for example we still need blood donors
so if you're able consider going in and
donating book an appointment online
through blood CA or by calling 188 to 36
sixty to eighty three on our CalPERS
window donor the Sun si vous pouvez
Ferrand oh oh who's on collage Alfa
Papa no rendezvous visited oh shit de
Marquis back if you give blood continue
doing that you can continue giving blood
by making an appointment at one eight
hundred two three six six two eight
three there are also other ways of
supporting Canadians abroad a few
moments ago I spoke with president
zalenski of Ukraine about how we could
coordinate our efforts I'll also be
talking about with Prime Minister Leuven
of Sweden this afternoon we have
announced a new fund to help people get
up to five thousand dollars to come home
to Canada or to help support them while
they are waiting to come home to Canada
we're working with telecommunications
businesses who have agreed to send a
text message to Canadians abroad
regarding consular services available to
them ministers Bains and champa are
working with partners to implement that
effort we want to make sure that
everyone has the information they need
there is a great deal of false
information misinformation circulating
and we want to make sure people know how
to get help Canadians can come home and
should come home all those who are
having difficulty in returning home well
we are doing everything we can to help I
spoke about this to the leaders of Air
Canada and WestJet yesterday hold but
there's no doubt these are uncertain
times but no matter what happens next we
can count on each other so keep
supporting your neighbors by picking up
some groceries for them if you're
already at the store check in with
people on the front lines like cashiers
and truckers pharmacists and hospital
staff take the right steps like staying
home and working remotely to help
flatten the curve and as you do know
that your government is right there with
you
we're working to slow the spread of this
virus we're taking steps to support you
through tough times
there is nothing we won't do to keep you
safe
to protect your health thank you yes it
involved no happy thank you hi mr.
Mackenzie great was CTV News yesterday
premier Kenney and Alberta estimated
that it won't be till May or June that
social distancing measures will be
lifted how long do you think social
distancing and having people work from
home will be in place for we are going
to continue to follow the best
recommendations of experts we've heard
anything from weeks to months we know
this is a difficult and extraordinary
time in which Canadians are taking
difficult and extraordinary measures and
we will continue to do that until
Canadians are safe oh that one's yeah
hey Murphy on TV on the shutdown of the
canada-us border when is that going to
come into force exactly you had said in
recent days that things will get worse
before they get better
could you tell Canadians what the worst
case scenario is regarding the canada-us
border we are working on the final
details with the u.s. but we expect the
measures to come into effect sometime
during the night between Friday and
Saturday it's so in about a day and a
half as for the measures and scenarios
that we are considering we are well
aware that there can be a wide range of
possible scenarios so with regard to
physical distance closing certain shops
these are measures that will help keep
Canadians safer but we'll be ready for
anything
on the fine-tuning of the agreement
between Canada United States I think
it's almost there my understanding is
that the measures will probably come
into place in the night between Friday
and Saturday so in about a day and a
half CBC News prime minister president
doll Trump's yesterday signed the
defense production Act which would allow
the US military to help in the
production of personal protective
equipment such as masks and the Italian
military is also helping to Purdue
ventilators Canada has its own defense
production act with similar powers so
are you considering using them and under
what kind of circumstances yes we are
considering using any measures necessary
to ensure that Canadians and our health
care systems have the supports they need
we've already been engaged with industry
on production and ramping up capacity to
build and create more more equipment we
will of course look at military
procurement as a solution as well
there's a range of things that we can do
we will do what is necessary we don't do
difficult material but we are looking at
all the measures that we can and will
take to make sure that the equipment
people need is available we've spoken to
a number of manufacturers many
manufacturers to meet the needs of what
they can do to meet to see what they can
do to meet the needs of our healthcare
system and we're also looking at
military production regarding the air
lifts mr. Sean pine talked about are
there countries that have been
identified as a priority where are you
at with air lifts and what about the
Canadians on the cruise ship near
Marseilles can you bring them home we
are looking at the huge demand coming in
from around the world Canadians abroad
have received a text message telling
them who to contact and how to
communicate if they need help I've
spoken to the leaders at Health Canada
and WestJet and we have decided to work
together to repatriate as many Canadians
as possible urgently as for the cruise
ship I have no information at the moment
to bring Canadians home it's time for
Canadians to come home from around the
world we recognize that that will be a
challenge that's why we sent out a text
message to all Canadians overseas with
information on how to share their
situation and get into
with consular services I spoke yesterday
with the heads of our two large airlines
at WestJet and Air Canada to talk about
how we can work with them to ensure that
there are flights to bring Canadians
home we will continue to respond to the
overwhelming demand by Canadians for
support we will be there to help them
and get home as many people as we
possibly can in the coming days and week
on the cruise ship in question I don't
have any specific information on that
but I'm sure there'll be further updates
at noon on the regular press conference
janelda mobile where are you regarding
your thoughts on the emergency measures
Act do you need the provinces or
Parliament's approval to go ahead with
it is it an option for you to restrict
is it an option to restrict inter
provincial movement we will look at all
necessary measures we're not setting
aside any possibilities any measures we
might take to keep Canadians safe
however the emergency measures act is an
extreme measure it has tremendous
implications and it would require
legislation it needs to pass the House
of Commons it does give us strong
instruments but we already have the
instruments to do what we need to do now
if we end up having to take measures
that could be implemented only through
the emergency measures act then we will
consider using it you mentioned 305
million would go to indigenous
communities to help this with this
pandemic you mentioned that the
distinctions based approach could you
explain what that means for First
Nations status non status into it and
maintain Asian communities we are going
to be sending money to indigenous
communities for them to use the way they
need to to keep their communities safe
through
kovat 19 and support support access to
to supplies they need and get through
this difficult situation we recognize
that indigenous Canadians are faced with
greater health vulnerabilities and
greater economic challenges than most
Canadians at the best of times there is
a need for special support and special
care for indigenous communities and
indigenous Canadians right across the
country Minister Miller of indigenous
services will be part of the press
conference today at noon to answer more
questions and to talk about specifically
what we're doing with indigenous
Canadians thanks part Minister Ratna
kirilee raised you from claims on small
business small businesses who've had to
shut their doors already and you know
how zero revenue coming in say that the
help that's promised that was promised
yesterday won't help them if it doesn't
get there in time you before they you
know go bankrupt
what about immediate payroll support we
have made credit a lot easier to access
for businesses of all sizes right now
those were moves we made last week to
ensure that there are loans there is
bridging financing available for
businesses large and small we've also
taken specific measures on payroll
support for small businesses that will
be available in the in the in the near
future
that help for Canadians will be flowing
in the coming weeks we recognize that
this is a difficult time both in terms
of getting these new programs in place
quickly enough to help Canadians and
that is why I'm going to be working with
the public service to ensure that all
our efforts are focused on supporting
Canadians through this difficult time
okay new canoe song a deep seeds or
puppies we recognize that small
businesses face particular challenges
and that's why yesterday we announced
measures to help them specifically we
also said they would have easier access
to credit so that they can get through
the crisis that access to credit should
be available very very quickly
Canadians that need a source of income
will also receive help in the coming
weeks we are doing everything we can to
fast-track it but these are new programs
and that is why we're working with the
public service to deliver the help as
quickly as possible
Thank You Missy
the first question is from America Walsh
from The Globe and Mail please go ahead
I've got the whole high Prime Minister
I'm wondering what you your message is
to retirees who are seeing their savings
dramatically hit by changes in the
market is the government looking at for
example supplementing OAS or GIS or or
is there anything that you will be doing
for them is that the market disruptions
are massive and many many Canadians have
seen their retirement savings and
Pensions reduced significantly we will
be taking measures to ease the impact of
that we know that our seniors have
worked hard all their lives to be able
to retire in comfort and there is a lot
of anxiety there that's why we will be
there for our seniors as well
thank you very much Melanie murky lapis
mr. Trudeau yesterday you announced a
robust assistance plan what scenarios
are you looking at
how many hospitalizations are you
considering how many people might lose
their jobs can you give us a few numbers
please we are looking at a range of
scenarios and we're preparing for a
range of scenarios we hope that these
can be minimized and that's what we're
trying to achieve with the measures
we're putting in place now we're
encouraging people to stay home we're
encouraging them to work from home we're
helping people to maintain a source of
income if they're unable to work we want
to get through this with the minimum
impact possible and with the lowest
number of hospitalizations possible we
are of course preparing for worst-case
scenarios but hoping to avoid them
thank you we remember that you know the
world thank you mr. Trudeau many people
are stuck abroad at the moment and
asking for help to come home
they left recently when the pandemic was
already underway people are saying that
they might have been careless what do
you think of that notion and do you
believe that we should still use
government funds to bring those people
home what we are doing now is trying to
help all Canadians we are not going to
judge them we're just going to try to
help them that is why we're working with
Airlines to try to help Canadians come
home in a very data very difficult time
we're focused on trying to get the our
air
operators to to facilitate more flights
to get Canadians home we recognize that
this is a very difficult and exceptional
situation and we're just going to be
here for each other yes it's a lot thank
you all right you just heard the Prime
Minister addressing the nation on
various issues some new details on plans
to temporarily close the canada-us
border for more on that let's bring in
Mike Armstrong who's in Ottawa Mike we
now have a timeline for the closure
finally we've been sort of waiting for
that we're hearing now according to the
Prime Minister that border closure will
come into effect Friday night into
Saturday morning he said they're still
fine-tuning the measures there is a lot
to be negotiated a lot to to decide in
conjunction with the u.s. to have
approval on what constitutes essential
service central travel and what is
non-essential who will make the list who
will be allowed to cross the border and
who won't be the other challenge for
them is dissemination they have to get
that information to the border guards
right across the country on both sides
by the way north and south they're
fine-tuning the details according to the
Prime Minister
with the us second question here what
about the Canadians that are still
abroad he said he didn't want to judge
them but he wants to find a way to
repatriate them
yeah the Prime Minister said a couple of
times that he's been speaking to Air
Canada
WestJet to make sure that they are there
and they know how they can help get
Canadians home that last part was
interesting we were trying not to judge
Canadians who perhaps left last week or
things like that but you know these
airlines are ramping down
they've got fewer and fewer planes in
the air and so there's an urgency to
getting these Canadians back as quickly
as possible he also said he's spoken to
the the leader of Ukraine today he's
going to be speaking to Sweden all in an
effort to facilitate getting those
planes in getting those Canadians out
and as well they're also working at
getting text messages to Canadians
abroad so they know who to contact how
to get what consular services are
available for them there's a lot of
misinformation out there the Prime
Minister said and he's trying to get
them good information Canada's foreign
affairs minister is a bit more realistic
about the situation with Canadians
abroad saying that they might be stuck
there for weeks because airspace is
closing there aren't as many flights as
we had before it's tough the Prime
Minister has been saying for more than a
week I think it's time to come home and
it might be too late or he said before
it's too late
and too late is coming there are fewer
and fewer planes in the air fewer routes
Canadians can come home by law the
country can't tell a Canadian at the
border you can't come in that's fine but
if there's no flight to get you from
London to Toronto how are you getting
home all right Mike Armstrong in Ottawa
let's go to our chief political
correspondent David akin David what were
the big takeaways for you well I think
today there was no actual announcement
per se there was no as with yesterday
big aid announcement or whatever there
was as you guys have been talking about
there is some new information on when
the canada-us border is going to close
but I think what we're gonna see now
really is our prime minister and we're
talking to see this with premiers and
mayors across the country again sort of
playing the the civic leader duty trying
to calm people down
minding people about the tasks that we
all have to take about social distancing
and so on reminding people that the
government is planning to stand by and
there were some hints that there may be
some more measures interestingly there
was a one question I think was in French
when the Prime Minister was asked could
we see situation where we may have to
limit interprovincial movement in other
words to restrict movement of Canadians
within Canada and of course he said
nothing is being ruled out it would take
some legislation earlier today Finance
Minister Bill Morneau just to catch
people up as well did say that the
government is working on some
legislation for some of the aid packages
announced yesterday and we could see
some parliamentarians it wouldn't need
you wouldn't need many believe it or not
you only need a quorum of 20 MPs for the
House of Commons to to do something and
that could happen over the weekend or
Monday David the Prime Minister also
talked about calling out to industry to
build more ventilators expand on that
mhm that's right so not only industry to
build more ventilators but also what
about doing what some other countries
noted in the United States are doing and
calling on the military to assist either
with the production the distribution you
name it and once again the Prime
Minister here saying nothing's been
taken off the table in fact they are
actively considering how they can use
the Canadian Forces to get equipment to
wherever it has to go obviously
respirators are the big deal right now
to get enough respirators built we've
seen all sorts of stories of
distilleries across the country
converting from you know making vodka or
whatever it is into making alcohol-based
sanitizers so so industry's standing by
ready to go I and you know if you take
ticket the Social Feeds of the Chamber
of Commerce president Perrin Beatty you
know he's putting the call out any
manufacturers who can quickly retool and
make some of munchy needed equipment you
know put your hand up there's work to be
done all right David akin in Ottawa
let's go back now to Mike Armstrong Mike
the Prime Minister has been very visible
in this crisis despite being in
self-isolation as David just said there
wasn't a whole lot of new information
today but this is the fourth time in a
row that the Prime Minister wants to be
out there tell us about that yeah and
it's not easy for him he's in so
isolation as his wife is sick I spoke to
the finance minister about what it's
been like to work with the Prime
Minister in that situation and he said
it's actually gone quite well he said it
he's finding it harder to work with
people over the phone that you don't
know but he said I've worked with the
Prime Minister for five years on a daily
basis so working with him over the phone
has been no problem but it kind of feels
like one of the things I've been
thinking about is the HMCS Fredericton
set sail
January 20th for the Mediterranean as
part of Operation reassurance to help in
sort of central Eastern Europe and
operation reassurance sort of feels like
the name you could give to that stepping
down the stairs that the Prime Minister
is doing each day as he tries to tell
Canadians were there for you it's a very
measure tone though yeah trying not to
panic Canadians at the same time exactly
trying to say one of the main things
that I keep taking away from all these
is the importance of reminding Canadians
that the supply lines are open because
if you go on your twitter feed you're
gonna see those pictures of store
shelves with nothing on them and people
who aren't leaving their home are
nervous you're not you know you yeah
it's good to remind people that you know
what things are still moving things are
getting to the stores and we keep
hearing they've spoken to the grocery
store CEOs and so we know their stuff
those shelves are being restocked as a
matter of fact you're starting to see
the pictures on Twitter I'm happy to say
where people are pointing out no look
there's milk in my grocery store and
there's there are eggs in my grocery
store that stuff continues what about
how long this social distancing could
last yeah that's a great question they
really don't know how long it's gonna
last and it's a real challenge that
could be whether it's three weeks three
months or six months but I'll tell you I
have a cousin who right now her parents
have just come back yesterday and
they're in the same house so they've had
to isolate her parents in a part part of
the house but at the same time her
husband is a doctor and they've had to
isolate him in another part of the house
it is extremely complicated and it just
shows you you know especially what
doctors are doing doctors and there's
nurses and health care workers the
challenges that they're facing because
it's hard to just go back to your family
at the end of the
something we have never seen in our
lifetime thanks so much Mike
once again Prime Minister Justin Trudeau
has announced the new restrictions that
the canada-us border could take effect
late Friday night or early Saturday
morning things are still being hammered
out with the White House you can find
full details on global news dot CA + on
global national tonight I'm Robin Gill
thank you for watching we return you now
to regularly scheduled programming
this has been a special report from
Global News
you